every year MIT Technology Review makes a
list of 10 breakthroughs we think will
have a big impact on the world we've
identified things like natural language
processing augmented reality CRISPR
wireless charging and gene therapy
before they went mainstream so when we
heard Bill Gates was interested in
helping us choose this year's list we
jumped at the chance
through his investing and the work of
the Gates Foundation he's thinking a lot
about where technology is going and how
it can do the most good for the most
people
we offered bill a short list he ignored
it almost entirely this list is very
much his own vision i sat down with him
to talk about what he picked your
famously optimistic and you know you
subscribe to the view of people i cants
rustling and steven pinker that when you
look at the important indicators life
has been getting better consistently for
billions of people how do you sustain
that kind of optimism in a world in
which you know climate change is
accelerating we have political
polarization and disruption caused by
social media we have growing economic
inequality which is fueled at least in
part by automation and AI so there's a
lot of current worries about the
technology having a harmful effect so
how do you retain your optimism it's
great that people are worried about the
problems because they require action you
know even take in equity globally
inequity is down that is the poor
countries are getting richer faster than
the richer countries are getting richer
right the bulk of humanity lives in
middle-income countries today if you go
back 50 years there were very very few
middle-income countries it was pretty
bimodal where he had Indian China Africa
were poor and then Europe u.s. Japan
starting to be fairly well-off and not
much in the middle but today China's at
the high end of middle income India's at
the low and middle income Brazil
Indonesia it's a it's a phenomenal story
and the ability of science to saw
problems you know clearly in the case of
heart disease and cancer make a lot of
progress some of the more chronic
diseases like depression diabetes I'm
optimistic even obesity
you know we're gaining some fundamental
understandings of the microbiome and the
signaling mechanisms involved in these
things so yes I am optimistic it does
bother me that that most people aren't
optimistic and you know so one of us is
wrong like this is right do you think
that you have may be successful persons
by us in other words you of course we
have to factor that in right at my own
light you know I've been extremely lucky
and you know the country I was born in
the education I got to have the business
work I got to do even my foundation work
is amazing and interesting work but even
tracting out for my personal
characteristics and personal experience
I I think the big picture is that it's
better to be born today than ever and
it'll be better to be born 20 years from
now than today so I want to talk about
some of the individual technologies you
picked for the list so one of them is
lab-grown meat which is still very
tentative still very expensive why was
that important enough to make the cut
and you do you think that in a I don't
know a decade two decades we could see
lager and meat replacing a substantial
proportion of animal grooming yes I do
part of the reason I picked it is is to
remind people that clean energy does not
solve climate change you know every time
you read about Oh clean energy that's it
we just need clean energy no you don't
that's only about a quarter of the
emissions come from electricity
generation so here you have a gigantic
piece that is from beef production and
now this can be a substitute so this is
a category that people weren't paying
much attention as a greenhouse gas
problem and yet I think the path
to solve it is clearer than in say the
cement or steel or other materials case
right and other technologies you picked
is AI Virtual Assistants so the
reference there is two improvements and
things like natural language processing
but you know these are still AI is a
basically very dumb machines they're
done one narrow task really well the
computer is so stupid that when you're
when you present email you don't let it
order it for you you don't trust it to
have enough context to look at the
material understand the relationships
and your calendar that it orders them
for you you you pick which application
to run you pick which item to open so
it's working at a very very low level
today I do think that we'll have
executive assistant type capability in a
five to ten year period now you know
I've known to be too optimistic about
some of these IT things in the past but
the generally they have progressed and
you know it's a huge priority project
for companies like Google and Microsoft
and on some things like translation you
know the deep learning approaches are
surprisingly good and so I work on that
lot in my part-time work with Microsoft
and you know I want one so right so in
that case it's gonna happen yeah
absolutely let's pick another of the
technologies that you picked which i
think is probably near and dear to your
heart which is the reinvented toilet and
you've explained this as the biggest
advance in sanitation in 200 years so
tell us some more about that
well the technologies are often decent
enough that you know they stayed the
same and so the idea building sewers
using clean water having a processing
plant you know that's the paradigm in in
rich countries unfortunately in even in
some middle-income but certainly in
low-income countries the idea that
you're going to build that sewer system
the capital cost to do it is just
unattainable and yet the quality of life
both in terms of disgust and disease
when you're not taking the human waste
and getting it out of an increasingly
urbanized world you know Africa will
although it's the last place it will be
50 percent urban 20 years from now will
the kids there be healthy but maybe just
describe briefly what it does okay well
it takes the human waste the liquid and
solid and in some cases it treats it as
a uniform some most cases it does some
type of separation the solids you can
essentially burn the liquids you can
filter now the cost of the equipment
that does this reliably is a real
challenge and the net energy now burning
the solid part actually you get energy
but whether you can make the balance if
you actually have to boil the liquid
part that uses up a lot of energy right
and and so the technologies we have
today work but you know the cost per
seat is over five thousand dollars
narcy's and maintenance that has to go
into those things to really get into
those slums we're gonna have to get down
to the ultimate is the single-family
household so the woman doesn't have to
go out at night that we need to be less
than 500 dollars right and so you know
there are days that's you know it's kind
of an intimidating Carter is there
another technology like that which is
you know something that has been around
for so long and it's so well established
that nobody even thinks of innovate
but that actually in the same way as the
toilets could be a you know right right
for disruption there are cases where the
sort of trickle down approach of okay
the ritual does something in some way
right and now hey the poor will just
learn to do it you know in the rich
world going to your doctors and getting
regular medication sort of works
actually compliance isn't that good what
we'd really like for the rest of the
world is something like a drug Depot
where it's doing continuous release so
that say you have take six months of TB
medicine or you have to constantly have
some HIV prophylactic drug in your body
at a certain level drug Depot's would
help the the poor world application a
lot it's not necessary for the rich
world and so there you have to challenge
scientists to do something that if they
just look at the rich world target
product profile they won't see it
likewise you know keeping vaccines cold
in places where you have lots of
electricity reliably stick it in the
refrigerator that's fine in Africa as we
get out into rural areas we've had to
challenge engineers to create new types
of refrigeration and you know that you
know looks like it's rolling out in a
positive way so trickle-down works for a
lot of things you know cell phones chips
you know measles vaccine but it it isn't
you're gonna miss a lot of potential
innovation if if you insist on that and
toilets is one where it's even hard to
see how some of these big Indian cities
will ever deal with their waste if all
we have the Seward sanitation and
large-scale Sanitation processing right
so you lead a 1 billion dollar
investment fund breakthrough energy
ventures which is investing a whole
bunch of different technologies not all
of them in a generation but that are
about limiting emissions the question I
have is you know there it feels like
there really a lot of technological
solutions to climate change
and do we really need more of them or is
the biggest problem not political about
governments implementing them and
creating the incentives in them to be
taken up when you say to India should
you provide electricity to everyone to
have things we take for granted heating
air conditioning their path is to build
more coal plants that's the cheapest
form of electricity for them and so yes
the rich countries are rich enough that
if they chose to they could pay huge
premium prices for electricity
now the reliability piece you know Smeal
talks about you have seven days in in
Tokyo where you have no Sun no wind
right you know they the overall cost of
electricity and Tokyo would be for the
entire year would be more than doubled
to have a hundred percent renewables
solution we don't have ways of making
cement steel meet that our zero
emissions even a doubled premium for
those things you know in France they
were asked to pay a five percent
increase on their their diesel price
right right and now it's on acceptable
so the willingness to go for super
expensive things whose only benefit is
their reduction in greenhouse gas
emission it's just not there politics is
where you decide how much you're gonna
put into basic research or how you're
gonna going to make things attractive
for these innovative companies or how
you're going to let things roll out when
they're an ax less mature state but no
if we froze technology today you will
live in a four degree C warmer world in
the future guaranteed and you said
recently that you want the u.s. to
regain its lead and you're gonna try to
persuade the leaders of this country to
regain the lead in nuclear power if we
didn't have climate change the quest to
get broad acceptance of nuclear power
wouldn't be a priority for me the
general public attitude towards nuclear
is a real challenge and the economics
are real challenge so if you can solve
safety including the perception of
safety and solve the economics you know
that would be fantastic it's not easy
you also have to convince people that
you're not gonna have a shortage for
uranium you're not gonna have
proliferation and that the waste isn't
going to be a huge problem but the two
big problems are the economics and the
safety and and so daunting there are
very few entities working on it even
though the digital tools we have now
it's insane that we're not building a
new reactor design China is probably the
place that's most positive for nuclear
energy as you say even there the
populace is asking questions about the
safety and some of the reactors that
have been built you know did have cost
overruns and the way that that they're
balancing their power generation and
their grid they have some challenges
there that are hurting the economics of
all energy producers so that gives us a
nice segue to start talking about China
it has laid out these plans to be the
world's leading technology superpower
within the next few decades
it's got plans and a bunch of specific
areas do you think it can get there well
it's impressive what China's done but
China's strength in digital areas even
in biology where they're probably five
years behind where they are in digital
technologies it is very impressive
I mean Xinhua is one of the top ten
universities in the in the world and the
number of science graduates in China's
is far greater than in other places the
the real question I have to ask is
innovation and China good for the world
if they cure some form of cancer if they
have seeds that are more productive is
that a good thing in the realm of
economics it's not zero-sum it's really
good the only zero-sum game there is is
war and so you know I don't think we
should end up in in a in a war with
China so
a trade war or any other kind of war
right so the idea that they're starting
to be innovative that is good for the
world and like most countries in middle
income status they're more willing to do
big projects and upset the status quo
the US and the 50s and 60s you know
Japan and 70s and 80s Korea 80s and 90s
there's that middle income state where
your your technological capability gets
really strong and you're willing you
know whether it's your infrastructure or
science to to go out and do very very
ambitious things the u.s. it's good to
have a sense okay we have to renew our
edge you know in fact Japan was never
going to overtake us and from scientific
innovation but I do think in the 70s and
80s when we were like oh geez
you know have they figured things out we
haven't you know that we renewed our
commitment to basic research so it will
be post World War two it'll be the first
time that we have a a broad
technological competitor that actually
uses the commercial market as the way
they get their strengths the Soviets had
the problem that they didn't have the
commercial side and so it meant that
although their scientific understanding
was very good their ability to actually
make things in an economic way fell way
behind what we had and so we had you
know incredible global uniqueness that
we that's kind of spoiled to sent away
we won't have as much neatness relative
to China even though we're likely to
stay number one for a long time thank
you very very much bill I was really
fascinated yes we should our great
[Music]